Updating the article on how we use Pivotal Tracker (#416)
ombulabs/blog: _posts/2018-09-06-how-we-use-pivotal-tracker-at-ombu-labs.markdown

layout: post
title:  "How we use Pivotal Tracker at Ombu Labs"
date: 2018-09-06 11:10:00
reviewed: 2020-04-15 10:00:00
categories: ["agile", "pivotal-tracker"]
author: "etagwerker"
---

We like to use [GitHub](https://github.com) to its full potential at [Ombu Labs](https://www.ombulabs.com), so any tool we add to the toolset needs to integrate nicely with it. As a growing agency working in larger and increasingly more complex projects, we need a project management tool that allows us to keep track of our work and plan accordingly. For this, we use [Pivotal Tracker](https://www.pivotaltracker.com).

There are many things that are easier with Pivotal Tracker, as long as you are using it the right way. Some of its features are very useful for agile teams like ours. This is how we like to use it to ship value with every sprint and keep track of our [team velocity](http://wiki.c2.com/?ProjectVelocity).

<!--more-->

## Step 1: Writing user stories

> All tasks related to a project should be tracked through user stories. A good to way to think about user stories is that it is a high-level requirement card. A user story can be used to represent a technical requirement, a use case, a usage requirement or even chores the development team needs to complete. [Pivotal Tracker](https://www.pivotaltracker.com) gives you the ability to create 4 different types of stories:

Reviewer: I think there's a typo here `A good to way`

1. Feature
2. Bug
3. Chore
4. Release

Most stories will be either *features* or *bugs*, although sometimes there will be *chores* to be
done. If a *chore* reoccurs many times, then it's probably time to write a *feature* to reduce the time spent completing that *chore*.

Both project stakeholders and the Scrum team can request stories. If a developer sees a need for a story, they should create it. If the product owner needs to define a feature that should be added, they should create a story. However, new stories will always be added to the Icebox. Once the sprint is planned, stories being worked on will be dragged into the current iteration section of the project.

In order to indicate priority, we organize the Icebox from most important to least important stories, from top to bottom. This way, everyone involved in the project has a clear picture of the priorities.

## Step 2: Describing user stories

> Every [user story](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/user-stories/) should be a description of a requirement and consist of a summary and a description.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every [user story](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/user-stories/) should match a requirement and consist of a summary and a description.
```

It feels weird to have description twice, I'm not 100% happy with `should match a requirement` either though haha, maybe there's a better word to put there.

Author: Good point. I used "representation" instead of "description"

> The summary is a concise description of the requirement and it clearly states what needs to be done and why. For a user story depicting a use case, for example, the following structure should be followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summary is a concise description of the requirement and it clearly states what needs to be done and why. For a user story depicting a use case, for example, we follow this structure.
```

Saying `should be followed` gives the impression that you MUST use that structure when creating stories on Pivotal Tracker.

Author: @arielj that's the idea. Whenever we are using user stories to represent features or use cases, we should follow that structure (we don't always do it, but we should).

Reviewer: Yes, what I'm saying is that, when some external user reads that, it may look that's how _pivotal tracker_ excepts stories to be written instead of how _we_ expect stories to be written.

Reviewer: Maybe it just me though, the title of the article already establishes this is how we use PT.

Author: I re-worded that a little but I think the structure of that section is clear enough. What do you think?

Reviewer: :+1:!!

It is also important to keep in mind that when estimating stories, we are [estimating complexity](https://rubygarage.org/blog/3-reasons-to-estimate-with-story-points), **not hours**. Different developers might take different amount of time in completing that story, so **we shouldn't estimate hours**.

Story points are not hours. Given a user story that has 3 story points of complexity, a Senior Developer might take 2 hours shipping it, a Junior Developer might take 5 hours shipping it.

This will affect metrics such as team velocity, which are important when planning sprints. So it is always important to remember to think in terms of story points, not hours.

Once stories are estimated, the team is ready to kick-off the sprint.

## Step 4: Starting user stories

Once the sprint is planned, it's time to start working on the stories currently in the iteration.

When a story is started, the clock starts ticking on that story, and we should try to finish it as soon as possible. In Pivotal Tracker, to indicate work on a story has been started, the *Start* button should be clicked.

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure where, but maybe we can link the pivotal tracker help articles on some places, like this https://www.pivotaltracker.com/help/articles/story_states/ for more details on the states.

Author: Good point. I added an extra bit for that :)

## Step 7: Restarting a rejected user story

There will be times when an implementation is not good enough. It may fall short in terms of usability, performance, or behavior. The good news is that our process works. Someone verified a feature you implemented and found issues with the implementation.

When the time comes, you will find a user story in this state:

<img src="/blog/assets/images/user-story-restart.png" alt="State of a user story after someone rejects it" class="medium-img">

You can simply restart the user story and resume working on it. If you need to submit another pull request to patch the feature, you can continue with step 4.

## What if there are issues after merging?

We should not be shipping bugs to production. However, if after the story has been accepted and deployed to production an issue is found, the story **should not be changed to rejected**.

At that point, a **new** user story should be created with the type set to **bug** and the issue found should be described. The team will then proceed to follow the process to fix the bug.

## Conclusion

> [Pivotal Tracker](https://www.pivotaltracker.com/) provides a great way to track project progress and team velocity. This helps in determining when a big feature will be shipped. As much as we like to use [GitHub](https://github.com/) for everything, Pivotal Tracker integrates nicely with them (they recently launched this integration!) which improves traceability from feature to implementation.

Reviewer: Maybe we can link the help article on github integration here https://www.pivotaltracker.com/help/articles/github_integration/

Reviewer: And maybe we can also say that it integrates nicely with Slack.
